Taking a step back,
let's think about how we would access data from Java without Spring Data.
Here we have a Java application on the left and a database on the right.
Now typically,
we would use a data access library to access our data where we create code
to do things like query execution or result mapping.
If we were working on an SQL database and maybe we'd be
writing some JPA or Hibernate code,
or if we were working on a document database like MongoDB,
we'd be working with the MongoDB driver.
What's important to know is that our data access code would be
completely different for these two applications.
They'd come with different query languages,
different libraries for executing those queries,
and, in general, share no common interfaces.
If we throw Spring Data into the mix, then things work differently.
You can think of a Spring Data project as a wrapper
around the data access library,
always making use of the same common interfaces and abstractions.
In other words,
if we looked at a project using Spring Data MongoDB
from one using Spring Data JPA, the code would be remarkably similar.
Aside from that, Spring Data takes the approach of convention over configuration,
removing a lot of the data access boilerplate that we
would normally have to write ourselves.
So what are some of the abstractions that Spring Data
makes use of across all of its projects?
Well we'll be looking at these in detail throughout the course.
But for now, let's do a high‑level overview.
The lowest hanging fruit is CRUD, meaning if you create,
read, update, or delete some data from a database,
then you can use the same CRUDRepository interface to do so.
Spring Data also derives queries for us.
What this means is that we don't need to write queries ourselves because
Spring will generate them based on the names of our methods.
This really helps developers who could otherwise be overwhelmed by
a query language that they're unfamiliar with.
Whilst technically part of Core Spring,
we also get transaction management out of the box with Spring Data.
The benefit of this is that Spring makes transactions declarative,
reducing a lot of boilerplate with the page and sort
abstraction available for us to use,
which helps us easily traverse through large amounts of data.
We also get auditing,
allowing us to track who created or changed an
entity and when that change happened.
And it's important to note that this isn't an exhaustive list,
but gives us a glimpse of common problems Spring Data aims to solve.
So now we understand a bit more about Spring Data and what it achieves,
it's also worth emphasizing its benefits.
One core benefit is its consistent programming model.
Regardless of the underlying data store,
whether it's Cassandra, Neo4J, or MongoDB,
you'll still be working with the same familiar Spring Data code for all modules.
For example, we'll always be working with the same repository interfaces.
This helps keep things familiar for developers.
In fact, a lot of the time,
developers won't need to the underlying library that a
Spring Data module wraps around at all,
only working with the Spring Data interfaces.
This keeps the learning curve as low as possible for a developer.
And when they need to work with a new type of database,
Spring Data helps smoothly transition in order for them to get started quickly.
Another core benefit is a reduction in boilerplate.
Basic CRUD access comes out of the box,
and more complex queries are even generated for you.
This means developers can focus on writing application
code rather than data access plumbing,
helping them deliver functional requirements faster.
Finally, Spring Data integrates seamlessly with Spring Boot.
You're provided with a Spring Boot starter for each Spring Data module.
And if you include it in your application,
then Spring Boot will takes its convention over configuration approach,
setting up a database connection pool, creating entity managers,
and more.
This leaves you with a minimal amount of configuration to do yourself, again saving developers a bunch of time.